---
layout: post
title: 9/13/17 - Gimme a beat
category: Z80
tags: Z80 retrocomputing
---

![Final clock setup](/images/posts/2017-09-13/full_clock_from_side.jpg)

My shipment from Mouser came in, and my desk is now covered in ICs,
resistors, LEDs, and jumpers.

Ciarcia's book and other sources online start the building process off
with the clock, so I did the same. This was my first time working with
ICs, and the clock seemed like a simple and rewarding place to
start. Flashing LEDs will can make anyone feel like they've made
something cool.

<!--break-->

My first attempt at a functioning clock was Ciarcia's single step
design using a 7000, 7404, and an SPDT switch. This seemed simple
enough, just like any circuit where a component is turned on with a
switch. I also set up the slow clock, made with a 7404, capacitor, and
resistor, as pictured in the book. A 4-pin DIP switch block selected
between the two clock circuits.

![Clocks from book](/images/posts/2017-09-13/book_clock.png)

I had trouble testing and getting any validation from these circuits
though. I tried hooking an LED up to the circuit's output and
connecting the cathode to ground, but I think this resulted in the LED
emitting all the time due to the clocks 330 Ohm pullup to 5V. At the
time, I hadn't realized how IC logic worked outside of putting a high
or low voltage signal in on one side and recieving a high or low voltage
signal out of the other side. It took a day or two to discover that an LED
could reach ground through an ICs output when the output pin was in a
low state. For now, I took the circuits apart, cleaned up, and called
it a night.

The next day, I tried to make sense of the previous night's errors. I
tried to put together a logic probe circuit, but lacked some of the
materials. I figured that my Arduino might be able to read logic high
or low through the input pins, so I searched online to see if anyone
had set up an Arduino as a probe. I found a few solutions that not
only worked as a probe, but even as a full-blown multi-channel logic
analyzer. Hell yeah! Setup was simple enough: upload the sketch to the
Arduino, choose a port and baud rate, and launch the LogicSniffer
software. The sketch implements a protocol fot interfacing with the
open-source logic analyzer software. I set up a manual clock circuit
as a I had the previous day, then started up the analyzer. I flipped
the switch and captured data from the device a few times and was able
to see the input switching between high and low. Seems like everything
had actually been working, but I just couldn't see it before due to wiring
errors.

If you want to try the logic analyzer, you can find the Arduino sketch
[on Github here](https://github.com/gillham/logic_analyzer) and the
LogicSniffer software [at the creator's website here](https://www.lxtreme.nl/ols/).


Feeling a little more confident and prepared, I watched Julian Ilett's
Z80 video again. He seemed to set everything up so quickly and easily,
so I attempted to copy that. Julian used a simple 555 astable circuit
to clock his Z80, and the 555's output was even able to power an LED
to show the clock's pulse. I found a website for calculating 555 timer
setups and figured out what I'd need to get a circuit that would flash
around 4 times per second with almost a 50% duty cycle. I dug the
components out of my drawers and got a similar set up and working. The
first flashing LED; cool!

After getting the slow clock set up, I was
anxious to get the blazing 2 MHz oscillator from Mouser up and
running. The clock I bought was an all-in-one crystal oscillator
circuit. All I had to do was hook up 5V and ground to have a perfect
clock.

![Test clock](/images/posts/2017-09-13/full_clock.jpg)

I ran both outputs through a 7404 before hooking up the LEDs so I
could measure the real outputs, take some current off the ICs, and
still have flashing light to match the clock pulses. The 555's LED was
looking great, but the oscillator's LED stayed a dull green. That
seemed like it might be correct though, due to the circuit toggling 2
million times per second.

![Testing clock logic](/images/posts/2017-09-13/testing_clock.jpg)
![Good clock](/images/posts/2017-09-13/screen_good_clock.png)
![Calculator](/images/posts/2017-09-13/screen_555_calc.png)

To be sure, I hooked both up to the Arduino's digital pins and started
up LogicSniffer. The captured data looked great! My 555's wavelengths
were uniform, and the oscillator was putting out a perfect 2 MHz
square wave. I did notice that the 555's frequency was a bit slower
than the value from the calculator. Off by like 0.3 Hz even, which
seems like a lot when the calculated frequency was only about 3.9 Hz
to start with. Perhaps this is what the resistor tolerance is
about. I'm using an 18k resistor in the 555, so if it's 5-10% off, the
actual frequency may be correct after all.

![Bad clock](/images/posts/2017-09-13/screen_bad_clock.png)

The analyzer started acting up after a few more captures, especially
when I got the clock selector switch up in the mix. A consistant
pattern started to emerge on any channels with a wire inserted, and I
eventually noticed that the strange wave was at 60 Hz, which must be
interference. No amount of unplugging and restarting could make the
interference go away. I tried using decoupling capacitors and pullup
resistors, but those didn't make a difference either. When I
disconnected my clocks from the Arduino, I saw that the interference
was still there, so my clocks probably aren't the issue. Even with the
interference problem, I highly recommend LogicSniffer if you're broke
and clueless like me.

![Work area](/images/posts/2017-09-13/work_area.jpg)
