---
layout: post
title: 9/14/17 - Power Up
category: Z80
tags: Z80 retrocomputing
---

![New cables](/images/posts/2017-09-14/new_power_cable.jpg)

I picked up a bigger breadboard at Fry's, along with a few logic chips to play
around with while waiting for my shipment from Mouser to come in. When I got
home and started setting things up, I realized that the only way to get 5V power
to my breadboard was through jumpers from my Arduino's 5V and Gnd pins, which
isn't going to work if this project is going anywhere. It was late and I
was impatient, so I decided to improvise. I keep a giant bag of old phone
chargers and USB cables stashed away just in case, and I rememebered that USB
wall chargers put out 5V, even up to 2A sometimes. I said fuck it and got to
work.
<!--break-->

I recall from my XDA-Developers days how people used to praise BlackBerry USB
cables for their thick conductors and reliablility. I needed to be able to
solder or crimp onto the power lines of the USB cable to get some kind of
connector working, so a BlackBerry cable seemed like the best choice. Upon
snipping the micro USB tip off and slicing down the insulation, I was greeted
with a mess of wire strand shards all over my desk, which will probably end up
stuck in my feet later. It seems that the cable was shielded pretty well. The
power conductors ended up being very, very thin, and mostly consisted of some
synthetic fibers inside the insulation, perhaps for strain relief. I was already
this far in, so I stripped back some wire, cut up a breadboard jumper, and
attempted to splice the two together. It actually ended up working, but got what
an ugly cable.

![shitty cable](/images/posts/2017-09-14/shitty_cable.jpg)

I could not imagine this new piece of crap being nearly as reliable as the
original cable, so I tried to see what else I could find. I came across the wall
adapter for an old active USB hub that I don't use anymore and was pleased to
see that it put out 5V at a nice 3A max or so. The cables were super thick and
there were no extra cables, or shielding to get in the way. I cut the plug
off the end and was presented with two nice, strong, shiny copper wires. The
wires ended up being too big to stick into a breadboard, so I got some
heatshrink and snapped off two header pins and soldered it all together. This
one ended up looking much better, but I did have trouble keeping in the
breadboard. I also didn't like having those two conductors right next to each
other, soldered ono the header pins. I could see that shorting out at some
point.

![better cable](/images/posts/2017-09-14/better_cable.jpg)

Anyway, fucking up those cables took long enough to where I didn't get to mess
with any of my new ICs that night, and so I just drove to Fry's in the morning
to find something better. Most of the universal, adjustable DC adapters were at
least $20, which I wasn't looking to pay right now. In the prototyping section,
I did come across something like my hacked-together USB cable thing, but done
correctly. This cable has a male USB A connector on one end, and a DC barrel
jack on the other. Nice! I think this cable was about $3.00.

![new cables](/images/posts/2017-09-14/new_power_cable.jpg)

I still needed a female connector to get the power to the board though. I
couldn't find any jacks that would fit on a PCB, but in that same prototyping
section, they had a female DC jack with a two pin "JST" connector on the end,
like you might see on a computer fan or sensor cable. I couldn't find any female
JST connectors in the store, but I thought I could maybe fit two right-angle
header pins in there and stick that in the breadboard.

![connector](/images/posts/2017-09-14/cable_tip.jpg)

This ended up working very well. The connection is loose, but that's nothing
some tape can't fix for now. I finally have some reliable power from the
wall. Total cost of power stuff was about $6.00 I think. I now see that I could
have gotten a 5V wall charger and a proper connector online for less than $5,
but instant gratification is a bitch, and I lose all patience as soon as I get
really excited about a project.

![fixed it](/images/posts/2017-09-14/loose_cable.jpg)

I think this should do the job while I'm prototyping on the breadboard, and I'll
be ordering a proper barrel jack to solder in when I move to PCB. If the USB
cable in the phone charger isn't providing enough current when the project is
further along, I'll get a male tip for the USB hub charger to get that 3A. Now
that power is figured out, I can really get to work.
